---
layout: default
title: 3.21 Data Management
nav_order: 420
---

## 3.21 Data Management

This section should describe the computer system and data management
approach that will be used to support the study and details on how data
are to be collected, entered (e.g., if eCRFs are used), edited, and
corrected. For studies that involve a large number of sites and/or
participants, the investigators may wish to consider a computerized
approach for data collection.

Whether using a computerized approach or manual procedures,
investigators should consider utilizing systems or procedures that
encompass the following functions:

-   **Data Tracking**---to provide the status of enrollment, number of
    forms completed at the sites and number of forms transmitted to a
    Coordinating Center or lead site, as appropriate

-   **Data Entry**---that is easy to use and minimizes errors, such as
    facsimiles of the forms

-   **Data Editing**---that identifies out-of-range and missing entries,
    errors in dates and logical inconsistencies (e.g., first treatment
    date precedes protocol start date or protocol specifies an
    examination before randomization, but the examination form is
    missing)

-   **Updating**---to correct data and maintain an audit trail of all
    data changes

-   **Reporting**---to describe and account for accrual, forms entered
    and completed, etc.

-   **Statistical Analysis**---mechanism to transmit data to statistical
    analysis packages (e.g., SAS).

Investigators should involve staff or colleagues with data management
experience to assist with the determination of the data flow, transfer
of data from sites in a multicenter study, error identification and
resolution, development of useful reports, and deriving a frozen,
analytic database from edited or \"clean\" records. These areas should
be discussed in this section.

A Users Guide may need to be developed as a separate document to aid the
study staff with data management tasks.

Investigators should be aware that computerized systems used in studies
that will be submitted to the FDA must be documented and validated.
Guidance for electronic systems is found on the FDA Web site, Title 21
Code of Federal Regulations (21 CFR Part 11) Electronic Records;
Electronic Signatures
<http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm125067.htm>.

