# 2. Overview

A MOP is a handbook that details a study's conduct and operations. It
transforms the study protocol into a guideline that describes a study's
organization, operational data definitions, recruitment, screening,
enrollment, randomization, followup procedures, data collection methods,
data flow, case report forms (CRFs), and quality control procedures. The
MOP is intended to serve as a study "cookbook" that facilitates
adherence to study procedures. The MOP is developed before the study can
commence.

During a study\'s planning phase, the PI and study staff drafts the
protocol. The protocol must be approved by the IRBs of all Institutions
participating in the study and by the Data and Safety Monitoring Board
(DSMB). Prior to developing the MOP, the final protocol, CRFs, informed
consent documents, and administrative forms (e.g., screening and
enrollment log, protocol deviation log, etc.) should be finalized.
Additionally, if the study is to be submitted to the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) under an Investigational New Drug Application
(IND), an Investigator\'s Brochure (for investigational products) or
Package Insert (for marketed drugs) must be included. The timeline for
development of study materials must be planned for and typically takes
approximately 6 months.

Development of the MOP requires the involvement of the PI and study
staff to ensure that the MOP accurately describes how the study
procedures will be performed. A Steering Committee comprised of study
site and Coordinating Center investigators, often finalizes the protocol
and develops or oversees development of the MOP.

The MOP is a dynamic document that will be updated throughout the
conduct of a study to reflect any protocol or consent amendments as well
as the refinement of the CRFs and study procedures. The MOP should be
maintained in a format that allows it to be easily updated, and is
typically filed in a three-hole binder. For ease of organization, it is
recommended that the MOP be subdivided into various sections separated
by dividers or sheets of color paper between each section. Further, each
page of the MOP should contain the version number and date. As pages are
revised, an updated version number and associated date will replace the
original page(s) in the MOP. All previous versions should be archived.

