---
layout: default
title: 3.19 Administrative Forms
nav_order: 400
---

## 3.19 Administrative Forms

Administrative forms provide documentation of study processes and assist
with study operations. They may include the following, as relevant:

-   **Facsimile Transmittal Sheet**---serves as a cover page for all
    faxes.

-   **Telephone Contact Log**---serves as a record of all conversations
    regarding the study and study participants.

-   **Screening Log**---is a record of all individuals screened for
    participation in the study. It should be arranged chronologically
    and be kept up to date at all times.

-   **Participant Identification Code List**---is a record of the
    participant\'s name, medical record number, randomization number,
    and study entry and exit dates. Due to the confidential nature of
    this information, it should be maintained in a secure location,
    apart from other forms and data files at the study site. The
    information contained in the list must be maintained by the site for
    a period stipulated by NCCIH, the site institution, or other
    relevant body.

-   **Protocol Deviation Log**---is used to document deviations from the
    protocol as they are identified by participants.

-   **Study Drug Accountability Record**---should be maintained in the
    Pharmacy by the research pharmacist and must not be shared with
    other members of the study team.

-   **Record of Destruction of Clinical Product**---is a log used to
    document the destruction of any unused study drug. The date and time
    of incineration as well as how many vials/pills were incinerated
    must be recorded. This record should be attached to the Study Drug
    Accountability Record.

-   **CRF Transmittal Sheet**---serves as a cover page for each packet
    of CRFs submitted for data entry. It provides an inventory of the
    forms that are included in each mailing.

-   **Signature Log**---contains the signature of all members of the
    site study team. It is the responsibility of the PI and/or clinical
    research coordinator to:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Designate individuals authorized to perform outcome measurements,
    make form entries and changes, and

-   Note the date when any study team member is removed from the team
    for any reason.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   **Site Visit Log**---records individuals visiting the site. The most
    common reasons for visits are site initiation, monitoring, training,
    and closeout.

