---
layout: default
title: 3.11 Randomization
nav_order: 260
---

## 3.11 Randomization

Randomization is used to reduce bias in assignment to treatment. In
randomized, controlled clinical trials, participants are assigned to a
treatment group based upon a predetermined randomization scheme
developed by the study statistician. This section of the MOP describes
the randomization approach and procedures, including:

-   Randomization Plan: The method used for generating randomization
    codes for assigning participants into treatment groups are described
    in detail.

-   Process Responsibilities: The individual who maintains the master
    randomization list must be identified. This person is responsible
    for assigning randomization codes, notifying appropriate study staff
    that the participant has been randomized, and securely storing all
    randomization files.

-   Procedure for Randomizing a Participant: At each site, the
    individual who is responsible for initiating the randomization
    procedure must be identified. This individual must know who to
    contact once a participant is determined eligible for a study and
    which forms must be completed prior to randomization (e.g., informed
    consent form and participant eligibility form).

Randomization assignments must be documented so that they can be
reviewed during a data review or audit. Some studies maintain the
assigned and blinded randomization code in an automated, computerized
log that is separate from the study data, while other studies maintain
the assignment in a paper-based randomization log. In either case, the
method for documenting randomization must be described.

