---
layout: default
title: 3.22.4 Site Monitoring
nav_order: 490
---

### 3.22.4 Site Monitoring

In multisite studies, a Coordinating Center may conduct periodic site
monitoring visits during the course of the study.

The purposes of monitoring visits are to:

-   Ensure the rights and safety of participants

-   Confirm that the study is conducted in accordance with GCP
    guidelines

-   Ensure maintenance of required documents

-   Verify adherence to the protocol

-   Monitor the quality of data collected

-   Ensure accurate reporting and documentation of all AEs and
    unanticipated problems.

During monitoring visits, the data recorded on CRFs are reviewed and
verified against source documents to ensure:

-   Informed consent has been obtained and documented in accordance with
    IRB/FDA regulations

-   The information recorded on the forms is complete and accurate

-   There are no omissions in the reports of specific data elements

-   Missing examinations are indicated on the forms

-   Participant disposition when exiting the study is accurately
    recorded.

Site investigators must ensure that the monitor has access to all study
documents, including informed consent forms, intervention accountability
records, and source documents.

Once the site visit is complete, a site monitoring report is drafted to
provide feedback regarding any problems or issues that may have been
uncovered during the visit. The report should state the problems
uncovered during the visit and describe recommendations to correct them.
A timeline should be agreed upon and included in the report to ensure
that followup of the issues is completed and implemented into the
study's procedures.

In this section of the MOP, please describe the monitoring plan,
including a planned monitoring timeline.

