---
layout: default
title: 3.26.1 Confidentiality Procedures
nav_order: 550
---

### 3.26.1 Confidentiality Procedures

It is the responsibility of the study leadership to outline and enforce
participant and study data confidentiality policies. Study staff should
be instructed in their responsibilities regarding data safeguards and
cautioned against the release of data to any unauthorized individuals,
unless such a release is approved by the study leadership and NCCIH and
is not in violation of applicable Federal and state laws.

This section of the MOP will discuss the safeguards that have been put
in place by the Steering Committee to ensure participant confidentiality
and data security.

The following is a list of study participant confidentiality safeguards:

-   **Data flow procedures:** Data identifying participants should not
    be transmitted from study sites to the Coordinating Center.

-   **Electronic files:** Data identifying participants that are stored
    electronically should be maintained in an encrypted form or in a
    separate file.

-   **Forms;** Forms or pages containing personal identifying
    information should be separated from other pages of the data forms.

-   **Data listings:** Participant name, name code, hospital chart,
    record number, Social Security Number, or other unique identifiers
    should not be included in any published data listing.

-   **Data distribution:** Data listings that contain participant name,
    name code, or other identifiers easily associated with a specific
    participant should not be distributed.

-   **Data disposal:** Computer listings that contain
    participant-identifying information should be disposed of in an
    appropriate manner.

-   **Access:** Participant records should not be accessible to persons
    outside the study without the express written consent of the
    participant.

-   **Storage:** Study forms and related documents retained both during
    and after study completion should be stored in a secure location. If
    computers are used to store and/or analyze clinical data, the
    Coordinating Center or the investigator should address the following
    elements of computer security to ensure that the data remain
    confidential:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   **Passwords:** Passwords provide limitations on general access to
    computer systems and to the functions that individuals can use.
    Passwords should be changed on a regular basis.

-   **User training:** Study staff with access to clinical computer
    systems should be trained in their use and in related security
    measures. Training should include explanations of how to access the
    system and a discussion of the need for, and importance of, system
    security.

-   **System testing:** Prior to the use of a new computer system, and
    subsequent to any modifications, the system should be tested to
    verify that it performs as expected. Testing should verify that the
    password-activated access system performs as intended.

-   **System backups:** Backup copies of electronic data should be made
    at specified intervals. Backups should be stored in file cabinets or
    secure areas with limited access. Storage areas should have
    controlled temperature and humidity so that the backup tapes are not
    damaged.

