---
layout: default
title: 3.16 Study Compliance
nav_order: 340
parent: 3. MOP Contents and Organization
---

## 3.16 Study Compliance

Clinical trials are expensive endeavors and every effort should be made
to maximize adherence to the protocol and minimize noncompliance.
Comprehensive training on the study protocol, early review of the data,
and routine communications with the sites help to minimize protocol
deviations. However, there should be a mechanism in place to track
protocol deviations and procedures to notify appropriate parties about
their occurrence.

Protocol deviations include, but are not limited to the following:

-   Randomization of an ineligible participant

-   Failure to obtain Informed Consent

-   Enrollment of a participant into another study

-   Failure to keep IRB approval up to date

-   Wrong treatment administered to participant

-   Outcome measurement not performed

This section should describe what constitutes protocol deviations and
the process for reporting such deviations to appropriate parties,
including the study chair and site investigator, the Coordinating
Center, NCCIH, and the DSMB or safety officer, within 24 hours of
occurrence if possible, or as soon as they are discovered. Investigators
need to follow their IRB requirements for reporting protocol deviations
to the Board. In addition, if monitors discover any of these deviations
during a site visit, they should list any such occurrence in their
monitoring report. The Coordinating Center (for the study) and the study
coordinator (for the site) should maintain a log of all protocol
deviations and should report them routinely to the DSMB or safety
officer. While there may be rational clinical reasons for an occasional
deviation, a site with continuous problems is at risk for losing its
funding. A log for recording protocol deviations should also be included
in this section. A sample log is presented in [Appendix
C](#_APPENDIX_C_-).

