---
layout: default
title: 3.17.4 General Instructions for Completing Forms
nav_order: 380
---

### 3.17.4 General Instructions for Completing Forms

According ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines, all data recorded
on study forms must be verifiable in the source documents maintained by
the study site(s). Instructions for completing CRFs ensure quality and
consistency in data collection. In this section of the MOP, please
provide a set of instructions for completing CRFs. Some useful and
frequently used examples are listed below:

**Sample instructions:**

When completing paper study forms, PRINT IN CAPITAL LETTERS using black
ink. Note, participants must not be identified by name on any study
document submitted with the forms (e.g., ECG tracing, lab reports).
Replace the participant name with the participant initials and ID
number.

-   **Header:** Complete the header information on EVERY page, including
    pages for which no study data are recorded.

-   **Participant ID:** The participant ID must be recorded on EVERY
    page, including pages for which no study data are recorded.

-   **Time:** Use a 24-hour clock (e.g., 14:00 to indicate 2 p.m.)
    unless otherwise specified.

-   **Dates:** All dates must be verifiable by source documents.
    Historical dates are sometimes not known (e.g., date of first
    symptom); therefore, conventions for missing days and/or months
    should be described (e.g., UNK or 99).

-   **Abbreviations:** Use of abbreviations not specifically noted in
    the instructions for completing the forms can be problematic and
    should be held to a minimum.

-   **Correcting errors:** If an error has been made on the study forms,
    place a [single]{.ul} line through the erroneous entry and record
    the date and your initials. Indicate the correct response.

-   **Skipping items:** Do not skip any items. Some items may carry
    \"Unknown\" or \"Not Applicable\" response choices which should be
    selected when necessary.

-   **Incomplete data:** Data may not be available to complete the form
    for various reasons. Circle the item for which information is not
    available and indicate the reason near the appropriate field:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If an evaluation was [not done]{.ul}, write ND and provide a reason.

-   If the information is [not available]{.ul}, but the evaluation was
    done, write [NAV]{.ul}.

-   **Note: Only in rare circumstances, as in the case of lost
    documentation,** should NAV be recorded on the form. Every effort
    should be made to obtain the information requested.

-   If an evaluation is [not applicable]{.ul}, write [NA]{.ul}.

-   **Incomplete or Illegible forms:** Incomplete forms that do not have
    adequate explanation (as described above) compromise the integrity
    of the entire study. Errors, such as incomplete or illegible forms,
    are problems that require time and energy to resolve.

In this section of the MOP, a set of guidelines for incomplete or
illegible forms must be included. For example:

-   If an entire page of the form cannot be completed (e.g., no parts
    have any responses), and it is unlikely that it will be completed,
    draw a diagonal line through the form and write NOT DONE, NOT
    AVAILABLE, or NOT APPLICABLE, as appropriate.

-   The header information must be completed even though no data are
    recorded on the form. If a form can only be partially completed at
    the time of monitoring, but will be completed when the information
    becomes available, follow the direction of the clinical monitor.

-   Do not leave forms incomplete or unused without explanation.

